In this chapter will be learning three different types of e-mail that Web sites and web site owners
use to our e-mail systems that web sites use automatically or internally.
domain name.
Transactional email and marketing email.
By the end of this lesson you'll understand the differences and applications for these types of e-mail
Let's just start by defining the difference between transactional email and marketing email transactional.
Email is defined really well in this MailChimp knowledgebase article because they supply a service called
the opposite of bulk e-mail transactional sends specific messages to one person.
A good example in wordpress is when you click the forgot my password link on the log in page WordPress
will send you an email and that e-mail is a transactional e-mail.
One thing to remember is that even though it has that word transactional in it it doesn't have to have
a e-commerce transaction or some kind of financial component.
bulk e-mail transactional e-mail isn't required to include an unsubscribe link.
in wordpress so doesn't WordPress send transactional email just fine.
Well it certainly does.
And one of the reasons why you would use a third party service like male chimps mandrill or a number
keeps their IP addresses and their e-mail addresses secure authorized and authenticated you lessen the
We all know that millions of spam emails go out every single day and many of those are spoofing another
And you can get those IPs and those e-mail addresses and domain names blacklisted by Google and other
And that would be a very negative thing for your clients or your own web site.
There's certainly a lot of articles and recommendations from different Web sites that you can find on
sites and other web applications like Wordpress.
outgoing transactional email services are available if you Google him.
One is how to use Google's S-M T.P. server where if you have a free Gmail account you can use Google's
name being spoofed or being stolen from someone else's spam email.
Here's a great article I found and it's how to use an SPF record to prevent spoofing and improve e-mail
reliability.
If you just search for any of these terms look for this article on Digital Ocean.
It's an excellent primer for learning about how to prepare your domain name and your website and prevent
Unintended spam messages with your domain I just mentioned that Google's S.M. T.P. server if you're
has a charge to it.
There's also two more excellent transactional email services that offer free plans that have plenty
Send grid is one that has a free plan that allows you to send up to 12000 emails per month and you can
And then another one is called Spark post and they'll allow you to send up to 100000 emails per month
on an ongoing basis for no charge and spark post actually has a WordPress plug in.
That makes it really easy to set up and connect with their API so that you can use their service for
There are also some other great transactional email services that do charge a little bit of money.
Transactional email service is called Mandrell and it just went from having a free level less than a
And so if you have a paid MailChimp account you can choose to sign up for Mandrell which is an excellent
Now flywheel the managed WordPress hosting company that I've highly recommended in this course has an
Now one of the things that you pay for when you sign up for a managed WordPress hosting account is at
flywheel they're using sand grid.
The excellent company I just talked about here to send emails from the Web site.
So because this is a managed WordPress host at flywheel you don't have to do any extra set up to get
a third party company like send grid to be sending out your transactional emails.
So you're not using the default WordPress ph mail system which can be spoofed and stolen for spam but
which is much more protected.
Now I use site ground for my cloud account I use iCloud account at site ground I should say to manage
at a certain IP address.
at site ground.
And because of that I'm able to customize using the control panel.
And here's the subpanel for my web site.
Greg Davis dot com and I've got in this control panel I've got all these services that I can use.
And basically this is one of those an example of a virtual private server or a VPN.
And so it's a little bit similar to a shared hosting account that I can pay one fee to get an unlimited
IP address.
And so I know I have to worry that this IP address will be spoofed in a spam situation but I am going
email system using both Gmail in one example and also using the Greg Davis dot com email server that
I manage some of my mailboxes for a small charge of $2 a month so that I have a lot of storage space
and a really professional service from a company that specializes in delivering email I'll also show
is another host that's very inexpensive.
Web sites live and I pay only $5 a month for an unlimited unlimited number of Web sites and cloud ways
provides an instance on the digital ocean servers which is really fast specific to WordPress hosting
and other CMS services.
But you can see that under Add-Ons in cloud ways they have a few different options for delivering email
transactional email through your Wordpress Web site.
You can use an S.M. T.P. add on to set up a good free Google G-mail like I'm going to show you how I
a lastic emails another service that's also a dollar a month per e-mail address.
So my personal and professional website at Greg Davis dot com I do have a number of different places
The most obvious one perhaps is on my logon page if I do a forgotten password.
But that's really a small part of what possibly might be sent out from your web site to individual users.
here I've got a it's a contact form seven plug in form and I get an e-mail that gets sent to me and
that their e-mail was sent and this is also an example of transactional e-mail.
So if you have a lot of people using your contact form there might be a lot of e-mails generated and
you can expand that idea into if you have a membership web site.
For example at W.P. death of course com each time a student signs up for their own sandbox site they're
And so depending on how many students or how many members sign up for a site or even if you have a membership
But they've become members and users of the Web site to access protected content as a part of their
You're going to want to use a number of different transactional emails for them and depending on how
installation.
And it's a best practice to send those transactional emails with an authenticated SPF record behind
And from a proven third party service so that those have the most deliverability possible.
You don't want any of those transactional emails going into someone's spam or junk folder.
happen if you're sending emails from your domain name and somebody tries to use your domain to send
So I'm going to ask you to practice the techniques we're going to be setting up and using in this chapter
on a live web server so that the e-mail systems are live and you can send e-mail from the server straight
see what's going on in the background with e-mails that are being sent from WordPress.
So whether it's at site ground with an inexpensive shared hosting program as an intro or if you have
cloud which is com or a managed host like flywheel I'll be recommending that you make sure and get a
Now both flywheel at get flywheel dot com and cloud ways offer limited time free trial and the trial
demo site that you can use and build for coursework here that might be the best option.
Floodways on some of their systems especially the ones that are hosted at Digital Ocean give you a two
programs.
Like I said I use a cloud account at site ground for my business and I also use the managed flywheel
hosting as a bulk plan for my larger traffic sites and my larger sites so that it's managed for me and
Now you can see in this flywheel help document if you read a little bit further down that they do not
party service like MailChimp and others and I 100 percent agree with that.
If you search around the internet you'll find a lot of information about whether to use Wordpress or
And it's definitely not recommended if you use transactional e-mail systems like the one included in
wordpress or even third party systems like send grid or Mandrell.
Instead MailChimp is an excellent bulk and newsletter and you might say marketing email system and I
They have a free level of service where you can have up to 2000 contacts for your autoresponder and
If you go down a little bit further on my home page you can see that I've got a form here and that's
name last name and e-mail are going to come from mine.
MailChimp account and not from WordPress itself.
The big difference is that MailChimp and others are set up to send hundreds thousands or tens of thousands
even millions of e-mails to a group of people all at once.
out newsletters or marketing and advertising pieces to bring business into the Web site.
Many of your clients will want a marketing email system and I highly recommend setting up MailChimp
it to your client WordPress Web sites and your own.
There's a lot of articles on the Internet that discuss this but I found a good one at WBM you dev dot
org in their blog are WordPress email marketing plugins worth considering and if you read the article
you'll find that you would only want to use an email marketing plug in to send marketing emails and
Or you're just starting out that best practice instead of using these plugins to send marketing emails
The best practice is to use a third party bulk emailing system instead.
This video was an overview of transactional email and marketing email and how they are used within the
I'd recommend you keep up with current trends and best practices in the area of email because there
address in the next video.
We'll take a look at email systems that you might be more familiar with send and receive email systems
We'll be learning about how to set up email systems like these but for custom domain names in this way
Web sites you create can have their own systems around email addresses like.
Let's do it